Over the weekend, a ransomware assault disrupted Porsche South Africa’s Johannesburg headquarters, bringing down some of the company’s systems and at least some backups.

According to MyBroadband, the attackers encrypted the company’s files and locked it out of corporate systems using a relatively new ransomware strain dubbed Faust.

According to security analysts, Faust is a descendant of the Phobos ransomware family.

This malware family is usually distributed through hijacked Remote Desktop Protocol connections.

But, according to PCRisk.com, the variation is propagated via downloads from malicious websites or torrents, online scams, attachments in spam emails, activation tools for unlicensed software, and bogus upgrades.

It encrypts potentially crucial data, rendering it useless until decrypted with tools for which the victim must pay the attackers a predetermined amount in bitcoin.

Apart from encrypting the data, Faust alters file names by appending a unique ID for the victim, the attacker’s email address, and a.faust extension.

It then displays the ransom demand in a pop-up window, which is saved in a text file.

The ransom letter informs the victim that their data have been encrypted and that they must pay a specified sum in Bitcoin in order to obtain the tools required to decode their files.

The victim is further advised that changing the encrypted files or utilising third-party decryption tools may result in irreversible data loss.

According to PCRisk.com, the sum payable would be determined by how quickly a victim notified the malicious actors.

Victims can also decrypt five files with precise parameters for free, demonstrating that the decryption tools perform as advertised.

It is now impossible to decode the data without the attackers’ assistance. For earlier ransomware outbreaks, free decryption tools are frequently accessible. No More Ransom keeps a list of decryption tools on hand.

Although many newer types of ransomware lack decryptors, collaborating with attackers does not guarantee that victims will be provided with the required decryption tools.

Companies with robust contingency plans in place should be able to clean up the infected workstations, patch the security weakness utilised by the attackers, and restore systems from backups.

Porsche South Africa has declined to comment

MyBroadband reached out to Porsche South Africa for further information regarding the event, but the company declined to comment, neither confirming nor denying the attack.

When we challenged the firm on its responsibilities to disclose any events in which client data could have been exposed, a spokeswoman replied that “all protocols would be observed”.

It was unclear what the attackers wanted from the firm or whether it had paid a ransom to reclaim access to its system.

It was also unclear whether the attackers had compromised or stolen key operational or customer data to be used later.

Automobile dealerships frequently deal with personally identifiable information since it is frequently necessary for car finance and servicing or maintenance contracts.

Nevertheless, Paraflare’s Digital Forensics and Incident Response team discovered that the operators of the Phobos ransomware were not renowned for exfiltrating data to be utilised in double-extortion style assaults.

In such “double-extortion” scenarios, attackers threaten to disclose the stolen material on the dark web as well as clearweb sites such as Telegram. This data can then be used by other hostile actors.

Paraflare also discovered that Phobos-affiliated criminals had more autonomy, demanded lesser ransom amounts, and were less professional than operators utilising other ransomware families.

Porsche Japan was the victim of a cyberattack in February 2018, which resulted in customer data being disclosed to hackers.

Details such as client names, home locations, contact numbers, yearly wages, and owned automobiles were stolen in that event.